January 20, 11:11am- The Project drew its initial impulses from the original skepticism of “truth”- that all modes of cultural “truth” are only constructed ideological power structures. No claims to truth are relevant to the autonomous individual who is seeking deeper personal Truth save that cultural truths lead to new areas of exploration. Most, if not all, aspects of cultural reality are mediated- informed in us by outside human force, and thus based upon the power structures behind them. They have an agenda. This agenda is stemming from a control structure of fear, greed, shame and guilt; it feeds on the lowest aspects of human nature- it nurtures stupidity and disease.

The New intelligent standard is Joy and pride in one's nature as a being of light, radiant and compassionate and eternal, One. This project is recalibrating culture via media infection; it is a new philosophy, a meme which fights the old. The adherents are mutants, maladapted to a corrupt culture. The mutants are future gods and goddesses- the lonely ones of Nietzsch, out of whom will rise the overman…

> "Wake and listen, you that are lonely! From the future come winds with secret wing-beats; and good tidings are proclaimed to delicate ears. You that are lonely today, you that are withdrawing, you shall one day be the people: out of you, who have chosen yourselves, there shall grow a chosen people- and out of them, the overman. Verily, the earth shall yet become a site of recovery. And even now a new fragrance surrounds it, bringing salvation- and a new hope."
>
> -- Thus Spake Zarathustra

Since we can not escape the need for meaning, we must take up our ability to define and begin to define based upon our highest standards- our dreams, our desires, our unpolluted organic selves.

To spread this redefinition (it is already spreading via awakening…) into culture is the goal (gotta bring it all together as a network). This system can not support this virus because the virus is the contradiction, the reversal, of the very foundations of this system. We are commodifying the downfall of the system which defines and allows commodification to exist. However, this process is gradual, as it would have to be. Since it must be organic, unmediated, it must move from person to person. It organizes all surrounding resources to its own aims, which are grounded in an ideology of empowerment. It is intelligent, intelligence applied to itself, applied to evolution. It starts small, in pockets, wherever there is control, or attempt at it, pockets of this Virus will always arise. These pockets at first are isolated; and many are unconscious of what they are; they have no context for themselves. Only a vague idea of what they are or why. Often, established order attempts to crush these pockets. Yet they create tighter control, and that tighter control gives rise to more pockets of chaos.

As the empire grows, it mutates those within it. It casts away and discards what does not fit into it- ie what does not conform. It separates wheat from chaff, goats from sheep, the fine from the gross, subtly and with great ingenuity. The power structure of the current empire is based on slavery- enforced participation. However, there is an outbreak of mutation in the advent of global culture; their lies about our “freedom” are turning into the awareness of their lies and a desire for real freedom- freedom to dream, freedom to Reality.

The Project seeks to recreate the ways we live, the ways we define what is possible, to allow for the manifestation of the highest ideal; and it inaugurates a structure based upon the collapse of reality- ie movements towards singularity; a structure which acts as a siphon from outer to inner THROUGH culture, and which accepts and promotes the enlightenment of consciousness and the exploration of other dimensions, contact with higher order of being, and the development of technology along such ideals.

There is a war going on in society- a war of minds; a war of memes. Agents of change and autonomy battle for their freedom to define; and they battle with all institutions which attempt to dictate the “real”. There is no “truth” to culture but only the social context of a truth; and the “truth” this system peddles is a static conception of individuality, a suppression of individual divinity, ; it is a war of ownership. This war is subtle; and until a person sees the devious nature of the slave mentality, of those who support the structure which forces us into submission. (application, submission, registration please!)

This Project awakens individuals, trains them, provides them with resources, and gives them organization. It is the formation of the Army. It is a company designed to jam current culture; to build a new alternative and then provide the necessary basis to nurture the evolved species. It rides on all currents of culture- green movements, poverty issues, rebellious teenagers, magical undergrounds, guerilla ontologists, fairies and warlocks… it redefines the power structure of knowledge; it harnesses the “occult” as a fundamental cornerstone to society. It redefines these old forms in light of new knowledge; it puts the soul and spirit back into dead, lifeless science.
