January 19, 2009

Each of these ideas is a manifestation of the self-referential nature of 89, the black hole/singularity. They all act to do one thing- draw all possibility towards singularity; to swirl all information, all possibility, towards the transcendent object at the end of time. By having myself embodied the vortex through magical identification and then iconoclasm, I have made this process inevitable; or rather it has made me inevitable. It always was, always is, always will be. It is the course of things; the essence of non-dual, where causation is intertwined, where free will is true will; where the will of the individual is the will of the universe because there is no distinction. “the perfect and perfect are one person, and not two; nay they are none.” Companions of the Vision have also been found; a Fellowship of Silence, a Conspiracy of Nothing. It is a Virus, a stirring, and awakening.

As we progress with it, give it form, give it design, give it a home and resources, it grows; slowly at first, gestating. However, at a certain point, it will be ready to unleash on global culture. It will be powered and fueled by the oldest esoteric streams, and each node will be a point of infection (or perhaps rather IS a point of infection. Can’t forget, this is already happening without anyone knowledge. It is decentralized… keep thinking in such limiting terms about this, in future tense. Need to speak more in present tense.)

It will take all things and reorder them according to its necessity. (the factor infinite and unknown… “61 the jews call IT”) It will be (IS!) alive, vital and pulsing; squirming and waking up.

It will be a company, a production factory, a training school, a way of life. It is still small; still in its conceptualization. However, it is in more people than just me now; other brains are thinking about it; the sculpture grows slowly and steadily. We are going to have rings made for it, 89 rings. We will design a structure for it, and methods of entry. A game of memes; a meme which is unknowable by nature, a factor infinite and unknown. It will be a glitch in the system of control; and no matter how hard they try to figure it out, they wont be able to. Our Agents are invisible, inside everything, everywhere. We wake them up.

The Project has so many aspects, so necessary and intrinsic. It is the ultimate piece of Art; it is magick entire bound into a structure; a movement outside to inside, and an injection from inside to outside; it is the Philosophers Stone, the red powder of projection which will transmute this dead culture, the lead of this corrupt system into the perfect gold of the golden age. We will build this Whole, the Seed, from the remnants of the Old. It will be a glorious movement to all Humankind, and it will take us to the stars.

The Order must be at the Heart of the New Civilization, with an Inner and an Outer. The outer must work in a business way; it must educate and administrate. The inner must be a Mystery School, a center of Universal Faith, of experience- a science and art of mysticism and magick. It must bring together all of the worlds major traditions and transcend all of them- creating autonomous beings of Light. This structure must grow within the dying world; we must channel resources towards ourselves, reorganizing from unsustainable to sustainable; from impermanent and static, to permanent and dynamic.

The methods of this process will be detailed in the book I am working on, which I am considering titling “the Transmutation of culture: the alchemy of evolution” or something similar. It must grab hold of the viral culture out there and inform them of what they already know they are. All that matters is that it swirls towards the right people, those whom are fully infected agents who are fully subsumed within the 4d sculpture.
