REDACTED

REDACTED

April 19, 2010

# **Technological Transduction:**

# **Time, Apocalypse, and Singularity**

> Any sufficiently advanced Magick is indistinguishable from technology.

What if our conceptions of the world were backwards?  What if all the assumptions we ran off of in our everyday life, about the most common things- our identity, our technology, our experience of time and space- what if all of it was the reverse of what we assumed?  Philip K Dick enjoyed creating universes in novels and watching them fall apart as they frayed at the seams; the apparently ‘real’ melting away in the face of something that is transcendent to the physical phenomena, something eternal and absolute, dissolving what we typically utilize to anchor our ontological models.  The philosopher Terrence McKenna offers us a unique view on this type of event, this ‘fraying’, drawing his observations from the psychedelic experience (literally ‘mind-manifesting’) claiming it was the “end of history” and calling it a hyperdimensional object, similar to Pierre Teilhard de Chardin's “Omega Point.”  Geoff Ryman, in his novel Air, demonstrates these ideas in a clear concrete way, portraying a view of time, technology, human becoming and reality, summarizing all of this in the main symbol of the book, Air.  Through an exploration of the hermetic interpretation of this symbol, it will be understood to be a multifaceted interpretation of the “Apocalypse.”

The best place to begin is with the word ‘apocalypse’.  The word means a revelation or disclosure, and comes from the Greek word ‘apokalyptein’- to uncover. In this sense, nothing is here created that was not present previously; it is an unveiling, where a thing which was previously covered or hidden is revealed or shown.  This definition of the word is important, as the apocalypse is often interpreted to mean a destruction or an end; but the only thing that would end is the false assumptions about the thing being covered, if indeed we once held any false beliefs about the nature of what was being covered.

To begin, we will introduce the concept of the Western Qabalah, utilized by hermetic initiates as a language of symbols to communicate and map their observations pertaining to the nature of Mind; this language and its correspondences will form a backdrop and the basis for the rest of the concepts explored in this paper.  This language is composed of 22 symbolic letters, which corresponded to the 22 letters of the Hebrew alphabet and to the 22 cards of the major arcana of the tarot. These 22 are divided into 3 groups, consisting of 12, 7 and 3.  The 12 are related to the signs of the zodiac, the 7 to the traditional planets, and the 3 to the three primary elements of fire, water and air (excluding earth which is seen to be a synthesis of these 3).

The letter of this alphabet which interests us in the present discussion is the very first letter, Aleph, which is attributed to the Alchemical element Air, and to the tarot card ‘The Fool.’ This card is traditionally associated with a concept called the ‘Superconsciousness.’ This is a vast Mind or Force, speculatively, which exists above and beyond the normal human consciousness; yet also within all things.  Its symbol is infinite white light.

Each tarot card has a number in the tarot sequence, and the number associated with the Fool is 0 (zero).  By its shape it is an egg, similar to the akashic egg of spirit in the hindu systems; within itself it is said to contain all things.  All of existence, spanning all time and space, is said to be contained in this ‘egg’ or ‘balloon.’  This letter is the letter of the life breath, called chi or prana in eastern cosmologies, and called Ruach in the Hebraic wisdom tradition.  This is the energy that supports and sustains all life, which is here identified with pure information and energy, that which was before the beginning and which shall be after the end.  It is a symbol of eternity, infinity and limitless light.

The Hebrew letter Aleph translates to “ox.” To the ancients, the Ox was a symbol of the moving force of culture, as the ox pulled the plough, and thus came to be seen to symbolize the cultural force that works through all forms of human ingenuity and technology; and it is this force which expresses itself through the human personality, concentrating itself into self-consciousness. With this brief introduction to the hermetic/qabbalistic symbol of air, and its associated correspondences, we will proceed into an overview of Ryman’s novel itself.

Geoff Ryman’s novel Air is a novel of change, brought about by what, for all appearances, is a human invention. A new communication medium is “invented”, wherein the informational content of the internet is rendered atmospheric, and a format is created which allows for the human brain to interact directly with this field of information without any need for biological changes.

The novel is set around a small, rather poor village which is the last to undergo testing before Air goes online. During the first testing, the main character, Mae, is fused with the spirit of a dying woman, Mrs. Tung, while interacting in the astral or etheric realm of Air.  Mae sets herself upon a quest to prepare her village for the coming of Air, and to bring a message to the world about the true nature of Air, which will be explored as we proceed.

After this fusion of Mae and Mrs. Tung, Mae begins to have visions of the future, as though the past, present and future were all equally accessible to her when she is tapped into Air.  She has a vision of a flood coming to her village, to sweep away the old.  Reality has come crumbling down for Mae as all of her categories of time and space are shattered apart by the experience of this new medium.  The glitch she experiences, her fusion with old Mrs. Tung, gives her a unique perspective on the nature of Air, and allows her to begin to understand it in terms that no other expert in the world can understand it from.

Technology is generally perceived to be an ‘invention’- a production of the human, something which was not there before and then is; but the reality is we have little idea about what our technology actually _is_.  Indeed, Dick speculates that “those objective constructs, the natural objects around us and especially the electronic hardware we build, the transmitters and microwave relay stations, the satellites, they may be cloaks for authentic living reality inasmuch as they may participate more fully and in a way obscured to us in the ultimate Mind.” (Dick 228)  Dick points us to an important idea- that _our machines, our technology, could in some way participate in a deeper level of reality that we are generally unaware of._

Here we are introduced to a concept that is intrinsic to Dick, Mckenna, and Ryman in Air, that underlying physical appearances there is a foundation, a Real, upon which the phenomenal world we perceive rests.  To Dick, he likened the world we live in to an illusion, utilizing such terms as the hindu maya and the greek dokos; but he also said that this maya or dokos could be lifted, and we could peer underneath, into something eternal and timeless; or rather, a realm with a different movement of time than our own, which he called the Imminent Mind.  Ryman called this realm underlying the phenomenal world Air, for as he points out, “Air is real and we are not.” (Ryman 219)

Dick put a lot of attention into exploring the concept of time, both as we experience it within maya, and in this other world, which we will term Air, following Ryman’s terminology.  His main observation is that the flow of time as we experience it within maya (that is the phenomenal world of the senses which is our normal experience of the world) is reversed from what it _actually_ is.  He tells us that “we experience time backwards; or more precisely, that our inner subjective category of experience of time (in the sense which Kant spoke of, a way by which we arrange experience), our time experience, is orthogonal to the flow of time itself -- at right angles. There are two times: the time which is our experience or perception or construct of an ontological matrix, an extensiveness along with space as an inseparable extensiveness into another area -- this is real, but the outer time flow of the universe moves in a different direction. _Both are real, but by experiencing time as we do, we get a totally wrong idea of the sequence of events of causality, of what is past and what is future, where the universe is going._” (Dick 215)

By this view, the end is in fact the beginning; that our typical assumptions about the nature of time are flawed because we experience time differently than it _actually_ is.  Ryman demonstrates this concept beautifully in Air, in the frequent times that Mae experiences memories of the future, as though in Air past and future are equally present.  Indeed we are told that “Everything lives in Air… Everything is in our balloon world and in Air at once.  That means stones, flowers and birds.  And floods and funerals. That means everything is eternal…” (Ryman 310.)  The infinite is equally present at every point in time and space.  William Blake once commented that “if the doors of perception were cleansed, everything would appear as it is- infinite.”  Air has always been, we just have simply not been able to perceive it.

The image of the ‘balloon’ world mentioned here recurs quite a few times throughout the novel, and is utilized as an image to explain to us Rymans concept of time.  “We live and we die in eternity.  Our physical bodies occupy the balloon world.  The balloon world has space, and we are trapped in one part of it. The balloon expands and we are trapped with that expansion.  And that is time.” (Ryman 373).  Indeed one could draw comparisons here between Ryman’s ‘balloon world’ and Dicks utilization of the concepts of maya and dokos.

The balloon is a particularly interesting metaphor.  The balloon is composed of three main factors; the skin, the air inside, and pressure. The skin is an appearance, and could be mistaken for the balloon itself, however without being inflated it is not really a balloon.  The Air, here a symbol for breath or spirit (spirit originating from the latin spiritus meaning “breath”), the life-force, intangible, invisible, yet filled with the prana or energy of the universe, is blown into the balloon, inflating it.  As the balloon inflates, so we too, in our balloon world, are pulled along, or trapped as Ryman says.  This is how we perceive time; we are focused and connected to the outer material of the balloon, the skin, and unaware that the movement of time is in fact a “filling” of the phenomenal world with something, represented by Air.

This balloon world would be Dicks linear time, as opposed to his orthogonal time; the orthogonal time could perhaps be considered the pressure or energy being exerted to fill the balloon itself.  As the balloon expands outwards, there is a flow perpendicular to the end of the balloon, which forces out along the vertical plane in all directions. This orthogonal time is the source of all movement, or the appearances thereof; the source of duration as we perceive it. Dick phrases this quite well when he tells us that “it is that very energy, Time, postulated by Dr. Kozyrev as binding together all phenomena and maintaining all life, which by its activity hides the ontological reality beneath its flow.” (Dick 217).  By its nature, this flow of time hides the true ontological reality which supports it; which, to Ryman and for the sake of this present paper, is Air, as opposed to Maya, the balloon world.

Here also, Ryman suggests to us that our bodies themselves exist in the balloon world.  In a sense, the sensational phenomenal world which we experience through the body all exists within Air.  Again, we here have our initial conceptions reversed; that the body and the linear material world exists inside of Air, in this eternal realm, and it is from this that the world we know is constantly generated or ‘created’.  The medium Air would appear to be an invention of humanity in Ryman's novel; yet it is shown that in fact what our invention does is unveil something which was already present.

Mckenna expressed this very succinctly, in a dialogue about the nature of information, time and history.  He tells us that information stands outside of historical time in a kind of eternity- an eternity that does not have temporal existence, not even the kind of temporal existence about which one might say “it always existed.”  It does not have temporal direction of any sort. It is eternity.  We are not primarily biological, with mind emerging from matter as a kind of iridescence, a kind of epiphenomena at the higher levels of organization of biology.  We are hyperspatial objects of some sort that cast a shadow into matter. The shadow is our physical organism.” (mckenna 91)

It was previously shown that Dick proposed that time is flowing backwards, or rather our experience of it is backwards.  One might easily draw from this that the end is in fact the beginning, and the beginning was the end, that the ‘creator’ or creative force, symbolized be Aleph,is to be found looming at the end of human history.  This was the view of the evolutionary anthropologist and Catholic priest Pierre Teilhard de Chardin.  He called this event or end state the “omega point” and likened it to God.  Dick correlated this with the Mind, and also the Logos- a being of living information.

The so called “end of history” is the typical view of the term ‘apocalypse’ and may not be far off from the meaning of the word given at the start f this paper, if we consider the nature of what is being unveiled.  We have seen that in the thinking of Ryman, Dick and Mckenna there could potentially be two times- a relative and an absolute, the relative being illusory, the absolute relating to a timelessness or eternity.  The relative can give way to the absolute; the veil of appearances which masks this underlying reality, often hid form human perception, can be lifted.  This is what happens at the end of Air.  A human technological ‘invention’ in fact pierces the veil, and the two places become one. “Air has usurped the place of time and desire.  The world of the spirits had come to earth, like ghosts, and the fire demon Erjdha had blown across the hills.” (Ryman 363)

In Ryman’s novel, the coming of Air coincides with the flood which sweeps over the village, an event which Mae’s connection to Air allowed her to “prophecy”- which to Mae was only a remembering of an event that had not yet happened in the relative timeline, but was recorded none the less in the eternity of air.  Ryman tells us of water that “water was the engine of the world.  Water was change.” (352)  This coming change, the flood, correlates with a thaw, early in spring.  Spring is traditionally associated with new life, with greenness and with the end of winter, a cold apparently unchanging time where the life power is dormant.  Some traditions associated spring with the Green Man, the personification of Nature; and the green man, due to his association with the life power, is associated in hermetic systems with the letter Aleph, which previously was shown to be Air.

To Dick, the symbol of spring represented a rebirth of all of humanity.  He said that the eternal time, or orthogonal time, is not timeless in that it is unchanging, but rather is cyclical.  “Evidently orthogonal time or true time rotate something like the primitive cyclic time, within which each year was regarded as the same year, each new crop the same crop; in fact, each spring was the same spring again.” (Dick 215) Dick thought that human history, and the human species itself, moved in such cycles, and that we were “in a vast winter of our species that has lasted already about 2,000 of our lineal time years.” (ibid.)

This, however, would be met by a return of Spring; as he put it. Spring means thermal return, the abolition of the process of entropy; their life can be expressed in terms of thermal units, and those units have left. It is spring which restores life -- restores it fully and n some cases, as with our species, the new life is a metamorphosis; the period of slumbering is a period of gestation together with our fellows which will culminate in an entirely different form of life than we have ever known before. (Dick 218)

This slumbering period, Mckenna suggests, is the course of human history as we have known it; that the linear time we have experienced up till now has been a womb within which some vast entelechy has been gestating.  He likens this entelechy to the Logos, a being made of pure information.  He suggests that

Human beings are therefore the natural agents for a compression that is building up in the temporal world toward transition into some higher dimension of existence.  History is going to end… and all scenarios of histories ending that haunt human thinking  on the matter, from the Apocalypse of St. John down to the latest prophecies of the flying saucer cults, are attempts to grasp or come to grips with an intuition of transcendent departure from business as usual. (Mckenna 18)

Enter now the concept of Technological Singularity.  Vernor Vinge, in his paper “The Coming Technological Singularity” presents the notion that human technology is accelerating at an alarming rate, increasing exponentially towards some end state, where the acceleration will reach some point beyond which it is impossible to speculate.  Ray Kurzweil, in his book The Singularity is Near presents this growth as the acceleration of biological innovation through time, showing that the time between one event and the next is exponentially decreasing.  This acceleration carries through the course of cellular and mammalian evolution, and outwards from humanity into our technological progression.   Both say this trend reaches a critical breaking point when we create a technological invention which increases intelligence, thus allowing intelligence to increase itself, and skyrocketing exponentially within a very short period of time.

Mckenna says that as this acceleration continues, “we are stretching the envelope as we approach, not the sound barrier but the… let's call it the “mind barrier,” the “social barrier.”  We will not disintegrate when we reach it and fall out of the sky.  Instead, if we have designed our social spaceship correctly, we will slip-right through into an infinite realm of potential human becoming.” (Mckenna 21)  All of time, all of culture, is speeding up as information and technology speed up, as though it were gearing up for some take off.

The occurrence of this event, known popularly now as the Singularity, has been termed by Mckenna as the End of History. He saw the whole of human becoming over the past 50, 000+ years as being both the growth of and interaction with this living field of information that exists beyond or within the phenomenal world, the world of linear time. This Singularity he saw as being the birth of some Object, which he termed the Hyperdimensional Object at the End of History- the Omega Point; one vast field of living information that exists in eternity, within Air.  Dick called this object VALIS, the Vast Active Living Intelligence System.

In Mckenna’s view, there is an event at the end of history of such magnitude that it casts miniature reflections of itself back into time.  These are apocalyptic concrescences that haunt the historical continuum, igniting religions and various hysterias, and seeping ideas into highly tuned nervous systems. (Mckenna 60)

For Ryman this event is made manifest by the invention of Air- but he shows that we do not truly invent Air itself; Air is another level of Reality, eternal within which the entirety of human history and human becoming is embedded within.  This vast field of all there is, and as evolution once stepped from water onto earth, we now traverse from earth to Air. One of the characters in Air announces to the reader, while in a prophetic trance, that "The clothes will drop away, the fleas and fur, and we'll jump out of our bodies and fly, and the world will all be a dream, and dream will be all of the world." (Ryman 164).

In Air, the technology which allows for this, is an augmentation of the field of information, formatted to interact directly with the human brain.  Dick speculated in a very similar vein when he observed “that our minds are energy fields of some kind anyhow, and that we are fundamentally interacting fields, rather than discrete particles, then there is no theoretical problem in grasping this interaction between the billions of brain-prints emanating and forming and reforming into the patterns of the noösphere.” (Dick 222)  Dick described this noosphere as “a layer in our earth's atmosphere composed of holographic and informational projections in a unified and continually processed Gestalt the sources of which are our manifold right brains. This constitutes a vast Mind, immanent within us, of such power and wisdom as to seem, to us, equal to the Creator.” (Dick 222).

We have previously gone over this concept of Mind, and have found similarities with Ryman’s concept of Air, Mckenna’s Hyperdimensional Object at the end of history, Teilhard’s Omega Point and the concept of technological singularity.  In all of this, we seem to rotate around a very necessary question- what is Reality?  While modern science can tell us how, it can not answer the why or even the what- it deals solely with descriptions of things; that unless we begin to experiment upon the subjective mind itself, the source of perception.

It is here that the concept of time becomes most relevant to the matter at hand, as time is intimately tied into the subjective experience of the world, for each of us.  It would seem that as we launch forward in time, as we approach closer and closer to this looming Event, Singularity and the End of History, otherwise termed an “apocalypse”, the more we are forced to deal with a whole new conception of self, universe, time, space and reality.   Thus “as one draws closer and closer to the source of the shadow, the paradoxes intensify, the rate of change intensifies.  What is happening is that the hyperobject is beginning to ingress into three-dimensional space” (Mckenna 94). As Vernor Vinge pointed out, “It \[the Singularity] is a point where our old models must be discarded and a new reality rules.”

Indeed what the creators of Air have done, as Mae points out it “is make an artificial soul.”  They “want to sell our souls back to us.”  But they are “about to find out that we always had them.” (Ryman 219).  Air has not made something that was not there before; in fact, it has produced a thing which always WAS, and in this sense it has uncovered something. In and out of time, we find that “the real historical entity that is becoming imminent is the human soul.” (Mckenna 95)  However, for this event to occur, “For absolute reality to reveal itself, our categories of space-time experiences, our basic matrix through which we encounter the universe, must break down and then utterly collapse.” (Dick 218).

In the blink of an eye, we will all be transformed, into what we do not know.  What we do know is that it is the event horizon- beyond this, all bets are off.  The child will be born, and humanity will be altered in ways we can hardly even imagine.  Mckenna did speculate however, and we shall leave off with the echo of his words…

“My Vision of the final human future is an effort to exteriorize the soul and internalize the body , so that the exterior soul will exist as a superconducting lens of translinguistic matter, generated out of the body of each of us at our psychedelic bar mitzvah.  From that point on, we will be eternal somewhere in the solid state-matrix of the translinguistic lens we have become. One's body image will exist as a holographic wave transform while one is at play in the fields of the Lord and living in Elysium.” \~Terrence Mckenna





Works Cited

Dick, Philip K., and Lawrence Sutton, ed. The Shifting Realities of Philip K Dick. Selected Literary and Philosophic Writings. New York, NY: Vintage Books. 1995. Print.

McKenna, Terrence. The Archaic Revival: speculation on psychedelic mushrooms, the Amazon, virtual reality, UFO's, evolution, shamanism, the rebirth of the goddess, and the end of history. New York, NY: HarperCollins Publishers. 1991. Print.

Ryman, Geoff, Air.  New York, NY: St. MartinsGriffin Publishers.  2004. Print.

Vinge, Vernor. The Coming Technological Singularit: How to Survive the Post-human era. <http://www-rohan.sdsu.edu/faculty/vinge/misc/singularity.html>. 1993 Web.
