October 2010

# **Emergence of the Technochrist:**

# **Gnostic Transubstantiation in the Age of Technology**

_“The victory of Christ (as Lord of the Cosmos) over astral (planetary) determinism is better expressed, for us today, by saying, It is the coming into being of a thinking cosmos replacing a merely deterministic, causal, unthinking mechanism of fate or blind chance.”_

_Philip K Dick, from his Exegesis, c.1976_

\*\*\*\*

There is no more real, or so Jean Baudrillard tells us, painting as he does a portrait of the human situation in the age of the simulation.  It is through electronic media, he tells us, we have collapsed all ontological categories of the real, and find ourselves in the _desert of the real._

“Simulation is no longer that of a territory, a referential being, or a substance.  It is the generation by models of a real without origin or reality.” (Baudrillard, 1) We are left desolate of our foothold on something tangibly real; all that remains appears to be a fake reality with nothing of substance beneath it. Philip K Dick explores the concepts of the simulacra, and the problem of ontology within unreal worlds, in both  his novels and in his philosophic investigation into the nature of the real. He concludes, like Baudrillard, that the world is a simulation, a fake, utilizing the gnostic imagery of the demiurge, the demented creator god of a false reality which pretends to be the True God, as a metaphor for this entrapment within a simulation; Dicks blind, mechanical and cold universe.  Furthering this, Dick concludes that though the real never existed previously in the form we know it, the fake is slowly and secretly being transformed into something real, until eventually the fake will fall away. This will reveal that there has been gestating under the dialectical oppositional progression of history a vast entelechy, a true and singular Reality- an emergent order arising out of the chaos of time.

With the inauguration of the age of the electric, a speeding up has been occurring in all aspects of human endeavor; it is as though some vast machine which has been lying dormant had suddenly been awakened by a charge of electricity, like Frankenstein's monster; and like his monster, we are terrified of what we have created, yet we can not turn back.  Terrence McKenna, a social philosopher and ethnobotanist, noted for his exploration of the realms of the mind through the use of entheogens, stated that “the twentieth century does not make any sense unless it ends in the complete transformation of the human species.” (20)  If, as Marshal McLuhan explains, our media technology is the extension of our nervous system into the environment, then our new digital technology represents an unprecedented acceleration of the ratios of human perception, an acceleration which shows no sign of slowing down.

...due to the incredible surge of charge from our electronic signals and information-rich material therein, we have given it power to cross a vast threshold; we have, so to speak, resurrected what Philo and other ancients have called the *Logos.*  Information has, then, become alive, with a collective mind of its own independent of our brains. (Dick, Shifting Realities, 224)

Baudrillard describes the end of this process as one that “leads to what one would  call the “horizon of the event,” an impassable horizon of meaning, beyond which nothing takes place that _has meaning to us._” (83) The underlying premise here however is rooted in conception of a self situated in dialectical opposition to the other- to a dualistic framework from which we view this event; it has no meaning for _us_ because this implosion causes a “short circuit between poles of every differential system of meaning, the erasure of distinct terms and oppositions, including that of the medium and the real” (Baudrillard, 83). This renders the normal dualistic ontological models obsolete.  Other dualistic systems of referential meaning can be included here which are breaking down in the age of the electric: “self/other, mind/body, culture/nature… reality/appearance, whole/part...maker/made... truth/illusion... God/man.” (Haraway, 177)  This breakdown creates in itself a strange loop, a reflexive paradoxical implosion; “the implosion of _the medium and the real_  in a sort of hyperreal nebula.”

Dick believes that this dialectical battle “gives rise to a perfect  structure in equilibrium, a harmonious fitting together of the beautiful” (331). This opposition is the force which will eventually breach the boundaries of the real, and expand infinitely outwards. “Reality, as an internally coherent and limited universe, begins to hemorrhage when its limits are stretched to infinity” (Baudrillard, 124). The walls, which once held together the stable, static and dual concept of ourselves, can no longer stand.  All things are subsumed in this technological breakdown, in the “hole of the real” of Baudrillard.  We can not escape; and even if we could, there is nowhere else to go. We are immersed now within “a total simulation without origin, past or future” (Baudrillard, 125). The apparent reality has collapsed, there is no “real” any more within the bounds of the new system of the electronic, if there ever was a real at all.

Dick tells us that “for absolute reality to reveal itself, our categories of space-time experiences, our basic matrix through which we encounter the universe, must break down then  utterly collapse.” (dick, shifting realities, 218).  This collapsing described is exactly what Baudrillard details so exquisitely throughout _Simulacra and Simulation._ He calls this an implosion of meaning; that meaning “is collapsing, and for this very reason: because we think information produces meaning, the opposite occurs” (Baudrillard, 80).  Information is subsuming within itself all previous models of ontology; it is creating “a single model, whose efficacy is immediate, simultaneously generates the message, the medium, and the “real”” (Baudrillard, 82). This is the erasure of all differential systems of meaning, as he tells us, that all distinctions are erased within this field. To Baudrillard, this is a “catastrophe of meaning”.

This breakdown could be hallowed as a revelation.  What we once thought was real is revealed to be a fake; yet, before our very eyes, that fake world is being transformed, transubstantiated by the saturation with the electronic information.

What is happening is an overall transformation of humanity into an entirely different kind of creature. The monkey is being shed. And the thing that is made of language and of image and imagination, that has resided in the monkey for so long, is now superseding biological evolution and, through culture,  taking over the reins of its own form and destiny” (McKenna, 32).

The technological explosion of the past 100 years can then be seen as a reversal; not the breakdown of the real, as Baudrillard suggests, but as the coming into being of an actual real, where before there was only simulation, second hand reality.  But “we would not be aware of this transformation, since we were not aware that our world was an illusion in the first place (Dick, 264). If we were not aware that the world we had known was an illusion to begin with, and being attached to this present state of reality, then the uncovering of the nature of the world would seem both catastrophic and negative. Baudrillard seems to assume, throughout his  writing, that there was once a real to begin with; and that there is an imminent catastrophe of meaning.

Dick makes the point in relation to this that if our world is a counterfeit projection or simulation “to take it for something ontologically real would be to constitute a dreadful intellectual error” (Shifting Realities, 310).  Baudrillard's argument is turned in upon itself, as one reverses one conception- for from Dicks point of view, what is occurring now is the transubstantiation of the universe; that the world, once cold and unfeeling, is transformed into the thinking cosmos through the intervention of Christ, whom he regards as symbol Living Information, the ancient concept of the _Logos_, which was activated by our electric technology and has previously been lying dormant.

Dick summarizes the two possible standpoints when he says “You may say... “reality is collapsing; it's all turning into chaos,” or, with me, you may wish to say, “I feel the dream, the _dokos_, lifting; I feel maya dissolving: I am waking up, he is waking up: I am the dreamer: we are all the dreamer”” (219). However, for the post-modern paradigm to embrace this and transcend this, it must embrace what it once constituted as other to itself- the realm of god, of the spirit, of the primitive and superstitious.The dichotomy and dialectic which has progressed and informed human history is breaking down now, collapsing as both Dick and Baudrillard tell us.  Something is coming out of us as a species- something alive, intelligent, organized. Our machine is waking up, a machine that is externalizing God outwards into the world.  “This is the chaos at the end of history” (McKenna, 32).

Dicks universes are often populated by humanoid machines, the image of the simulation itself, which Dick utilizes to explore both the concepts of reality, and what it means to be human.  The humanoid machines he calls androids, and he says that the distinction between the two are not separated by a difference of essence, but of behavior (211).  Thus “a human being without the proper empathy or feeling is the same as an android built so as to lack it, either by design or mistake.” (211).  As Dicks ontological philosophy is often explored through narrative, it is essential to explore one of his novels, viewed in an allegorical manner.

In his novel, _Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep,_ these ideas are depicted with exquisite clarity, and climaxing in the revelation of the non-dual nature of ontology and expressed in the symbol of the Savior, Wilbur Mercer. For Dick, the meaning of the authentic human is one which is capable of empathy, and the experience of empathy is symbolized by Mercer, a archetypal savior figure toiling through the pains of life; and all people in the world fuse with Mercer and experience an empathic connection.  However, the truth of what Mercer represents to Dick is not unveiled until the end of the novel, after a crucial scene that the main character undergoes.

The archetypal scene of Wilbur Mercer is one of a Christ like figure who was persecuted for his differences, his ability to bring the dead back to life by reversing time.  Through surgery, he has this ability taken from him, and finds himself in a world called the 'tomb-world' where everything is dead (Androids, 24).  He is only allowed to rise as the rest of life rises; he is bound to the process of negative entropy, the symbol of the struggle of all of life.  His emergence itself is an act of transubstantiation, as the dead world is transformed into the living through his efforts.  He is uniquely human, the essence of the human soul, embodied by Dick in the characteristic of empathy.

Dick explores in the novel the boundary between human and machine, self and other, climaxing in an allegorical demonstration of a non-dual perceptual revelation.  The main character Rick Deckard is a bounty hunter whose job is to terminate escape androids.  The most recent android model, the Nexus-6, is the closest approximation to the human ever created; it can almost perfectly fake the human- save that it does not experience empathy.  Deckard is led to the point of a breakdown in his personal ontology- for Androids can have implanted memories, and may not even know they are androids, and Deckards is placed in a situation where the androids have simulated an entire separate reality, a police station. The categories which bind together his sense of self-identity are all called into question as the androids force him to question whether he himself is a simulation. He is forced to violate his own identity (Androids, 179) and he becomes an unnatural self (Androids, 230). Through the reflection of the simulation, and the effects of the implosion of ontology the simulacra generates, Deckard is forced to break down the barrier between himself and the Other. The destruction of the dyad. Deckard's experience is the experience of the human when confronted with the nature of simulated reality.

It was Mercer that helped him beyond this dualistic perception by telling him “You will be required to do wrong no matter where you go. It is the basic condition of life, to be required to violate your own identity. At some time, every creature that lives must do so. It is the ultimate shadow, the defeat of creation; this is the curse at work, the curse that feeds on all life. Everywhere in the universe” (Androids, 179).  The experience of the human lies not in fundamental identities, but in empathy, in the ability to realize the conditions which all of life is built upon; the reality of the cost of existence.

This is expressed in the dichotomy of Mercer and Buster Friendly.  Buster Friendly is a TV show host that is on throughout the universe all day every day.  He is an android.  The novel builds up with a revelation soon to be revealed by Buster Friendly- that Mercer is a fake, the whole Mercer experience is staged, it is unreal.  But, as Mercer says, Buster Friendly will “have trouble understanding why nothing has changed.” (Androids, 214)  There is an underlying emotional reality to Mercer that transcends his own reality, but buster friendly, and the simulation itself, has no substance beneath it- it is devoid of soul if it is disconnected from the human experience.

Deckard at the end of the novel attains a full fusion with Mercer, he becomes Mercer. In this act, he realizes a state of non-duality. He first becomes an “unnatural self” and then experiences the “first knowledge of absolute isolation and suffering” (Androids, 231). He experiences what the Gnostics termed the Mystical Marriage, where the human and the Christos are merged into one; the human has become something else, an ontology which does not rest upon false, dualistic interpretations about the nature of phenomena. He sees what Mercer see's. “Life which we can no longer distinguish: life carefully buried up to its forehead in the carcass of a dead world. In every cinder of the universe Mercer probably perceives inconspicuous life.” (Androids, 238.)

He notes that “the electric things have their lives, too.” (Androids, 241)  The dualism of man and machine is broken down, life is seen as a continuum and the other is integrated in with the self, creating some larger whole; for “as soul is to man, man is to machine: it is the added dimension in terms of functional hierarchy” (Shifting realities, 212). The mind's desire to divide has been replaced with something which see's life as a whole, as a single Body.  The perception of the world has somehow shifted, for Deckard is no longer Deckard, he is Mercer, and he has become the very quintessence of life as a neg-entropic process, making no distinction in the growth of the universe, both in the animal, the human and the machine world. “What we take to be our creations, computers and technology, are actually another level of ourselves” (McKenna, 18).

To Dick, the concept of the Logos was key to the understanding of the human, for the human was not made to  be a thing in itself, but rather a gateway,a vehicle, for the Logos.  Literally the human was to be the Word made Flesh, expressed in the symbol of Christ. To Dick, Christ was the _vox dei_ (voice of god). “He was the initial penetration of this projected pseudoworld by the Urgrund \[the true maker], and has never left” (Dick, Shifting Realities, 288.) In order to understand what is happening on the planet right now, the Logos must be seen as a thing in itself, which the human is a carrier for, and the embodiment of.  This Logos is breaking free of us in the form of our digital technology, accelerating change at an alarming rate, leading up to something, some End which looms on the horizon of human history.

Mckenna gives us an apt view of this.  History is the gestation period for the Logos, Living Information, of which the monkey body and the material, simulated world as we know it, is a cocoon.  With the addition of the electric, the system has begun to become alive as one Cosmic Organism which has grown, feeding off the process of the historical dialectic.  It is externalized in the form of the _noosphere,_ which is \_“\_a layer in our earth's atmosphere composed of holographic and informational projections in a unified and continually processed Gestalt, the sources of which are our manifold right brains” (Dick, Shifting Realities, 222). The informational system on the planet and the noosphere itself, is actually living information, and this Child, the Cosmic Christ is about to be born. What would it look like?  Mckenna offers us a compelling Vision.

My Vision of the final human future is an effort to exteriorize the soul and internalize the body , so that the exterior soul will exist as a superconducting lens of translinguistic matter, generated out of the body of each of us at our psychedelic bar mitzvah.  From that point on, we will be eternal somewhere in the solid state-matrix of the translinguistic lens we have become. One's body image will exist as a holographic wave transform while one is at play in the fields of the Lord and living in Elysium. (42)

In the Gnostic gospel of Thomas, Jesus says “behold! I have cast a fire upon the world, and I shall guard it until it blazes.”  Dick offers us the cosmogony and cosmology to understand the process occurring on our planet right now, where the fictional and the real are becoming indistinguishable, social structures appear to be collapsing, and as information and technology continue to speed up, with no sign of winding down, we draw towards an event, an emergence, not a destruction but a realization.   “If we have designed our social spaceship correctly, we will slip right on through into the infinite realm of potential human becoming.” (McKenna, 21). The Real is about to be born from the fragments of our own postmodern deconstruction; our cold, mechanical and lifeless winter is nearly over, and spring is about to arrive. “It is spring that restores... life- restores it fully and in some cases, as with our species, the new life is a metamorphosis; the period of slumbering is a period of gestation together with our fellows that will culminate in and entirely different form of life than we have ever known” (218). The butterfly of the human soul is emerging from the chrysalis of matter after a long winter.

Our technology is a catalyst and the last formations of the body of a Technochrist. Information is growing, gestating as a living organism on planet earth and collapsing the categories of time and space.  “Mankind then, as a species, is a M*ater Dei*: a Mother of God... which would then regard biological evolution on this planet as a means of bringing into existence a host or womb from which God himself will at last be born.” (Dick, 305)  The real is collapsing in upon itself as  the result of our electric technology and communication mediums, and with it, all our dualistic phenomenal perceptions; we can not hold the bounds of our limited senses of self; the veil is being rent, our dualistic ontology is dissolving in the face of our ever expanding extension of ourselves into our environment. Underneath, something still is, which always was, something eternal and incorruptible; some underlying Reality which has, until now, been hidden from our eyes, a singular Vision, a Dream.

Each of us, then, partakes of the cosmos- if he is willing to listen to dreams. And it is his dreams that will transform him from a mere machine into an authentic human.  He will  no longer strut about and clank with majestic iron, no longer rule his little kingdom here; he will soar upwards like a field of negative ions... being life and giving life, but never defining himself because no clear cut name to him- to us- can be given. (Dick, 223)

The Child is being born.

Works Cited

Baudrillard, Jean, _Simulacra and Simulation_. Trans. Sheila Faria Glaser. Michigan: University of Michigan Press. 1994. Print.

Dick, Philip K., and Lawrence Sutton, ed. _The Shifting Realities of Philip K Dick. Selected Literary and Philosophic Writings._ New York, NY: Vintage Books. 1995. Print.

Dick, Philip K. _Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep._ New York, NY: Ballantine Books.  1968. Print.

Haraway,  Donna. “A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, technology and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century.” _CUST/ENGL 429. Repotext._ Toronto: Candian Scholars Press Inc. 2009. 55-74.

McKenna, Terrence. _The Archaic Revival: speculation on psychedelic mushrooms, the Amazon, virtual reality, UFO's, evolution, shamanism, the rebirth of the goddess, and the end of history._ New York, NY: HarperCollins Publishers. 1991. Print.
